# Project outline

### General information
I will be researching the difference of complexity of vocabulary between two books written by the same author, but from a different genre. 'Complexity' in this case means certain vocabular characteristics, like average word length, amount of unique words used and average sentence length. Conducting research on this topic could help give potential readers a more accurate expectation of the vocabular complexity of the genre they would be reading. While it will certainly not provide an entirely accurate expectation, as there are always books that stray away from the 'general' notion of complexity, it might help with improving this expectation and give people an easier time with picking a genre.
### Background information
I found two studies that have done research on a similar topic. There are probably more, but for the sake of this project I kept it to two.
The first one of these is 'Lexicon and Syntax: Complexity across Genres and Language Varieties' by Pietro dell’Oglio, Dominique Brunato and Felice Dell’Orletta from the University of Pisa. They research 'the interplay between lexical complexity and syntactic complexity with respect to nominal lexicon and how it is affected by textual genre and level of linguistic complexity within genre' (dell’Oglio, 2018). They go one step further and research the syntactic and lexical complexity, using a corpus to determine the complexity level. (https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2253/paper39.pdf)\
The second one is 'Variation in syntactic complexity: Introduction' by Kuiken, F.; Vedder, I.; Housen, A. and De Clercq, B. from the University of Amsterdam.
Their research is quite a bit broader than what I am researching, but also has a small amount of overlap with regards to syntactic complexity between genres. https://pure.uva.nl/ws/files/45450842/Variation_in_syntactic_complexity.pdf
### Research question & Hypothesis
My research question for this research project is "How does vocabulary complexity differ between two
genres written by the same author?"
My hypothesis is that certain genres contain more complex vocabulary compared with other genres. To give an example, I think a Science-Fiction book will have a more complex vocabulary than a romance book.
### Method
The dataset I will be using are two books written by F. Scott Fitzgerald. These are The Great Gatsby, which is a historical fiction, and This Side Of Paradise, a romance book. Both books can be found on the Project Gutenberg website (https://www.gutenberg.org/). As stated earlier, the complexity is measured by means of certain vocabular characteristics. I will be focusing on average word length and the amount of unique words used within the full text of a book. If a book has a higher average word length and a higher amount of unique words than the book it is being compared to, this book would be deemed 'more complex'. Later studies could dive deeper into syntactical and lexical complexity and the differences of these between genres and even different authors (and there are already some that do, as linked), but this would be too difficult to achieve within the timeframe of this research project.
